So now we're talking with Roger Stoddard at Houghton Library.
I'll just put this about right here.
When I did an interview with Nicholas Barker, let's start with this.
This is very interesting.
We were talking about collecting, institutionalizing things as opposed to going to private collections.
And he said, this is a direct quote, he said, Bill Jackson, who was a very, very great librarian at the Houghton Library at Harvard, once sold the world's most perfect copy of Vaughn's, sound like scintillians,
on the grounds that this was a book too beautiful, too perfect for a public library to own and not to be in a private collector's collection where it would be protected from too much use.
To Robert Taylor of Princeton, New Jersey.
And he did say, he followed me and said it went to Taylor and it went back to Princeton.
Who had given his collection to Princeton.
But did Jackson do that?
Did he say that?
That the copy was too perfect to be, and that's what I'm driving at.
I don't know.
It was a very lovely copy, and it certainly would be a big help to obtaining a good trade or getting a good price for it.
But I used that when I introduced Taylor as a speaker here, when he did a talk on the foibles of a book collector.
It was a beautiful talk.
It was a bibliophilic talk.
I have it.
I think Princeton published it, I think.
Do they?
I wish they did.
I wrote them a card after and recommended that they sponsor him in that talk also.
He was just lovely in one of the last things he did.
He couldn't stand up at that point.
He sat up in the exhibition room and conversed with the audience in a wonderful way, a wonderful sense of humor and all that.
But that's how I introduced him, by reminding him about this stuff.
So I wasn't here then.
I never heard Jackson tell it.
I forget how I discovered it, but that was part of my introduction to Taylor.
But let's throw that out as a... How do you feel about that?
If that, in fact, without using that as a general policy, if you have a perfect copy of a book, of an exceedingly scarce book, how do you feel about this thought that perhaps it shouldn't be in an institution, that perhaps it should be in the hands of a private collector?
Well, I suppose that if we were talking a generation ago, we would say that private collectors are able to pass on books of that sort, maybe great book findings, or fragile modern books, books of the past 150 years, in pristine condition, because they don't.
Collectors tend not to use their books, but to handle them with great care, to make protective cases for them.
They've done that for a couple hundred years.
Perhaps it's part of our responsibility in institutions to not only serve readers with microphones and books that get copied, but with books that get used up.
Just think of the undergraduate using up copy after copy after copy of standard texts and reference books, which we replace with others.
Not only to do that, but perhaps to take very good care
of some great historical documents in manuscript form.
We showed in bibliography class a week or two ago a perfect Elizabethan quarto, untrimmed.
We were talking about formats, the size of the sheet, the size of the book, and we wanted to make the point about what that looked like
So we didn't open it, we showed it as a closed pamphlet, full-size, untrimmed.
And that exists here for that purpose, not to be read, not to be microphones, but just for that purpose.
And there may be an increasing number of books like that, which we will have to designate for that purpose.
It's very hard to get to see a Blake illuminated book here at Harvard, has been for years, because we know that those books have a limited life.
There's so many times you open the fragile leaves, and they break.
You can almost make the comparison with how often you show watercolors in the museum.
It's the same thing.
There's only so many looks.
You go to the Portland Art Museum and look at Winslow Homer wash drawings, and there are little cloth covers that you lift up and then replace.
And the light level around you is very low, so that a lot of people are going to get a look at those without using them up.
In a similar way, we resolve to make exhibitions of those black books, and we have adjusted the light level and we have filtered the light in our exhibition cases.
so that we're not going to abuse the colors with our own lights.
And we will publicize to the English and art departments these periodic exhibitions of life.
But if we're going to pass them on to people three generations hence, we've got to be very careful.
Now, this Elizabethan pamphlet you mentioned, the content, though perhaps important, is irrelevant to this particular example of that
And you can find that elsewhere.
You can find it elsewhere.
You can go to another library and use that.
Okay.
Let's, give me a general, why is it so important?
We are sitting in what is arguably, or perhaps even acknowledged to be the finest special collection repository of any institution in the United States, certainly one of the great collections in the world.
Why is it important for great
for an institution, an educational institution, to have special collections.
Give me a general, why do we have these special collections?
We can speak very generally to it, particularly when you get a new institution, an emerging institution in Texas, in Indiana, in Illinois.
I'm wondering what's going to happen now at Emory now that they've got this $500 million of Coca-Cola money.
Are they going to try and build special collections?
But why do we do this?
I commit the resources.
I don't want you to say I know the answer.
It has something to do with the history of the institution.
If your library is largely wiped out in 1764, and you begin seriously repairing it, replacing it, and building again at the turn of the 19th century, and if your faculty is eager to build a library,
including medieval manuscripts, which come in in the teens of the 19th century, and eager to obtain a big U.S.
history collection, the Abraham Collection, 1818.
And to follow that up with science purchases in the 1840s, and then serious rare book purchases and vernacular literature purchases later in the century,
And then at the turn of that century, area study collections, you're filling your libraries with early manuscripts and rare books.
At a certain point, you no longer leave those on the open shelves.
Harvard began by marking them with a red book light as non-circulating.
They were in the library as non-circulating.
And when a book from Washington's library came here, they locked it up in a cupboard, a corporation .
So you go from those kind of century box-like grill front locked cases that they kept in Gore Hall for rare books and manuscripts, to the treasure room in Widener.
Widener was built.
It had a special facility for rare books and manuscripts.
special care and treatment of them before anyone knew anything about light levels and UV and stable humidity and all that sort of thing.
At least there was security and a staff accustomed to do with bibliography and the problems of book history.
Book history and bibliography were taught here from the teens on
If you get interested in that, I've got a little paper that gives an analogy of that.
It's very important for us.
So that by the time Kies Metcalf came to Harvard in the late 1930s and began to deal with the problem of central library building crammed with books and manuscripts, he found that one of the safety valves
in addition to building an undergraduate library , one of the safety valves was to build a special library devoted to rare books and manuscripts so that they would be emphasized, they would be brought to the attention of students and faculty and researchers, and they would be emphasized to those families that have inherited important papers
and important books, and to book collectors.
And that's what happened in 1942.
This library opened, beautiful library, impressed people.
People began to give collections and give papers to the library.
All these New England papers, you know, and Longfellow, and Lowell, and Howells, and all that, you know, this enormous mass of transcendentalist paper.
papers of Luther and Boston clergy, piled in to this building when it was built.
As a direct consequence?
As a sign that rare books and manuscripts were important at Harvard.
At that time, I don't know the figures for circulation, but I suspect that there was not a lot of activity in 1943 or 1944 in this building.
But certainly by the time I came around in the 50s, we were a very busy place.
My question is, can you measure the greatness of an institution by its special collections, by its holdings?
Is there a correlation?
Oh, no.
No, no, no.
Does it attract faculty?
Does it attract scholars?
I think you can measure, I think you could get a notion of the antiquity of an institution by the size of its rare football.
That, I think, is possible.
If you looked around this place and looked at the quality of the collection and their range, you'd say, well, this is not something that we've built in a generation or two or five.
This is something, this is 10 generations that it takes to put together collections of this magnitude and range and quality.
If you are going to be, if you are acknowledged as the finest university in the world, and few can argue with that,
certainly one function of a university is not just to teach, but to attract scholars.
And I would have to think that one of the features that would attract a scholar is the availability of unique, great, special research sources.
Well, Harvard has just attracted Lawrence Buell, a literary transcendentalist, a great scholar who joins the faculty as a senior
and he is an old-time, long-time researcher in this library, although he's been teaching elsewhere.
And he came over yesterday and started to go around the collection with me.
He's thinking particularly in terms of a spring-term seminar,
in which he will deal with the reputation, the changing reputation of authors, particularly in terms of that list.
And that has to do, of course, with the publication of their work and the series in which they are included in the looks of the books and the sizes of the editions.
He's coming to the place where the papers of Benjamin Fields and their successors, Hoden Mifflin, are.
with all the statistics on the production of the books.
He's coming to a place that has the papers of some of the important critics whose works he'll be teaching in their class, and where some of the authors he'll be teaching, some of the papers of the authors he'll be teaching, already found.
And then the books themselves, and sometimes pieces of the libraries of his authors,
And he was just absolutely fascinated to see, in that new context, what was available to him here.
I was able to tell him that we required the papers a little round, a compliment of the Tickner Museum.
He's fascinated by that, because that opens up a whole new set of authors and a whole different proof of books.
Plus the relationship with publishers, too, which is very important.
Yes, but to him, it's
You know, it's the reputation, the changing reputation.
What makes an author or a work a classic?
How is a classic created?
How is it forgotten?
How is it rediscovered?
You know, this kind of thing is what he's going to build this particular seminar around.
And he's got the books here, so that you can look at the books and see what they look like.
And he's got the publisher's papers, and then he's got some of the critics' papers and some of the authors' papers.
And in some cases, manuscripts as well.
Yes, yes.
He was fascinated to learn that John J. Chapman's papers are here.
He knows that Chapman has great potential for development in critical studies and a biography.
He didn't know that.
Now he knows that.
Perhaps we'll see a doctoral dissertation directed by Professor Gould on some aspect of Chapman.
But that's an example, one little example of what these resources mean.
Switching gears here, a year ago, it's going to be like almost a year ago today, which is very funny, you had mentioned that one question that you'd be interested in seeing pursued, and you mentioned no names, not so much, what interests you is not so much what drives people to collect, but you'd be interested equally in finding out what prompts people to stop collecting.
And I went away, and we talked about maybe some guy down in Rhode Island who collected Shakespeare, and perhaps he was getting blown away by Folger at every turn.
But then I thought, the great example is Arthur Hogan.
What prompted him to stop collecting?
And then, of course, he passed away before I had a chance to... Oh, it's too bad.
I don't think he would have talked to me anyway.
Oh, I think I would.
If his help had provided it when you were asking, I'm sure he would, because he's interested in that kind of thing.
Do you have a sense of that?
Harrison Horvath was another.
But he kept a few things, though, didn't he?
But he stopped collecting books, and he started collecting photographs.
And you can't say that he ever stopped collecting.
He was always collecting something, but it switched.
And at one moment, he
really stopped collecting History of Science, which was his big first love, History of Science.
Which was a great collection.
And Arthur Hogan had stopped collecting, and then decided to sell his collection.
And I don't know, I know that he was having trouble with his eyesight, and that probably inhibited him from
collecting and being very interested in his collection at one point.
But I think that he was able to mend his eyesight.
I think that he got back to the sight that he had lost.
I can explain it.
He never made a statement to that.
I've asked a few people.
Ed Wolff I asked.
I had hoped to ask Lady Eccles.
I still haven't had a chance to talk with her.
Not that they would know, but it would be curious to see if they had any thoughts as people involved in collecting, you know?
I think it's a fascinating issue.
I think that you can... And he's a great example.
I think you can discover reasons which prompt people to start collecting.
You know, if there's some vivid impression that's made on them in someone else's library or maybe in a bookshop, they see that they can afford to purchase and that there is available to them to purchase something if they wouldn't, if they would have expected only to find
In museums.
You know, someone who loves Milton finds in a bookshop a copy of the first edition of Paradise Lost that he or she can afford.
It's accessible and affordable.
Well, it's striking.
You buy that book, and then you buy some more books, and you see that they're available, too.
I mean, he certainly didn't need the money.
I don't think the money was the prime motive for Houghton, for Rappet Houghton.
I don't know.
He built this wonderful structure.
He gave you some wonderful Keats things, I guess.
That's the Keats collection.
It's largely his.
Part of it comes from Amy Lowe.
She started it.
She, if it can be said to have started, Billy Harvard Keats holding.
I can't explain that, and I can't really explain about Harrison and why he stopped neuroscience and didn't continue.
You can always find new things that feel like history of science.
You don't think it was indifference or having secured these things?
If I had any suspicions, I have thought about him a dozen times, and I have never come up with an explanation.
What made me think of it is I have a whole run of book collectors, and there was an article 20 odd years ago, and all it did was outline his major collections, the one here,
the one in New York, the miniature books, the one in Virginia, which is something like the most extraordinary private collection.
And I've seen the catalog of it.
Yeah, well, I mean, I just wonder, maybe it was, I've secured everything, and I mean, what other worlds are there to conquer?
Who's to say?
How did this go off?
Okay, this is a point for you.
Can I come back?
Potentially come back.
We're back on track here.
You mentioned that, oh, does Hart give a book collecting prize, by the way?
Like the Yale Prize, the Brown Pire Prize, University?
Committee to Visit the University Library established several years ago a book collecting prize.
Members of that committee established a second prize in
in honor of Philip Hofer, which includes artwork and books, and I can't remember exactly how it goes.
It may be every other time it switches back and forth, but it gives the undergraduates or the students the chance to compete in collecting art as well as to compete in collecting books.
the William Harris Arnold.
Do you know that name for an American book collector in the early years of the century?
He also did a kind of autobiography.
Here's a William Harris Arnold prize for the best essay on the true spirit of book collector.
And I've had a chance to participate in judging Arnold and visiting committee, not hopefully yet,
And each time, I found a various group of competitors and several good collections and several good essays.
Are these on file in the library, these essays, do you think?
I don't think that, well, you know, I'm so stupid I don't know.
Who would I ask?
The dean is the one who is responsible
eventually, the dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences for these prizes.
And I do not know if we send the prize-winning essay in Arnold to him and whether it's retained or not.
I don't know.
I'd love to read some of them.
It might be interesting to, you know, I'm basically writing a lot of established book collectors, but it would kind of be nice to see
Well, you've got wonderful accounts.
Shopping for books in bookshops or finding books in yard sales and out-of-the-way places.
You know, for rather young people, you've got some pretty nice tales of turning up treasures.
And I think there'd be a freshness and an innocence, too.
It would really be delightful, very useful to me.
And these are the benefactors of tomorrow.
I mean, is this figure into the thinking, do you think?
That's what Tom Adams suggested.
I suppose Arnold was interested in perpetuating the collecting spirit.
So that's one way to do it, to encourage undergraduates or students.
Graduate students can compete for that.
But that perhaps was in his mind in encouraging Harvard students to write about book collecting, to encourage that.
The book collecting spirit.
The true spirit of book collecting.
Which is, in your view, it's not just acquiring scarce and valuable and perhaps valuable titles, but I mean we're preserving achievement and thought, I think.
Is this part of the spirit, do you think?
Well, I suppose it's up to you as the essayist to convince the jury that you're on the beam, that you embody your text, the true spirit, whatever it may be.
whether it's how books fit together that you're getting, or whether it's going out and finding things that you can identify and that you can find out about or that you know about it, or what is your outlook on that enterprise of public collecting?
How do you feel about it?
What's your point of mind?
Let's change track entirely here.
You mentioned that you recently got back from
I guess it's Omaha where they have the Bloomberg stuff.
And I guess you had quite an emotional reaction to that, as you indicated on the phone.
Maybe you could just tell me a little bit about your feelings on that.
And I don't know precisely how I'm going to use this.
I think if we talk about this, we should agree that
what we talk about would not be published in any way until the case is settled.
Okay.
Now, it was due to take place, the trial was due to take place early in November, and it's been postponed, and it is my understanding now that it will take place or begin in the last week of January.
But if by some chance
The trial has not resolved it.
It must be understood that you wouldn't put in a magazine or anything about it, but let's assume now that we're talking... Let me stipulate that.
Can't even make an assumption.
At a moment, we're talking in a moment after it's all over.
I have spent now two stints of work in a warehouse on the outskirts of Omaha,
browsing among some 25,000 books.
That's my estimate, not an official figure.
Most of them showing signs of having been taken from institutional libraries.
And by showing signs, I mean they have book plates and stamps and shelf marks, or they have been defaced
in the places where you expect to find labels on the findings and book plates on the inside cover and markings around the title leaf.
I have now participated in identifying about 750 volumes from the Baker Library in the Harvard Business School and from the Widener Library in the college.
The books taken from Weidner are from the two great Anglin collections, the one formed by John Bartlett, of Bartlett's familiar quotations, who ran the bookshop across the street here, and which was given a shot mark of Ang, A-N-G for Anglin,
which came in in the middle 19th, middle to later 19th century, or from the collection formed by Daniel B. Fearing of Newport, Rhode Island, which came early in the 20th century and which has the prefix, or shall not prefix, of F for fishing.
Is Daniel Fearing spelled with me?
F-E-A-R.
The Fearing books are very easy to identify because they tend to be in half
green Morocco bindings with green marbled paper sides, which is to say they have Morocco corners as well as spine.
The Bartlett copies are half-bound, but not in a regular way.
Fearing obviously had a binder, and he had many of his pamphlets bound in a uniform way.
Now, from those collections, we had
taken the rarities for transfer to the treasure room or to Hogan, so that there were no complete anglers in the 17th century to be removed.
And in large part, the 18th century books had been taken out, so that the books that I found in Moab were largely 19th century books.
A lot of them were very cute.
They were slim, perhaps a small format, maybe a provincially printed account of angling experiences in England, perhaps the catalog of a manufacturer of angling equipment and supplies from the middle or later 19th century.
There was nothing really substantial, but they were pleasant books.
There are books that will give you pleasure.
They're fun.
Were they known to be missing?
Now, since we don't make regular inventories in Leidener or in Baker, that's a question that really doesn't pertain.
Okay.
Because if you want to say,
Which of the three million volumes in the central collections are missing now?
The only ones you know about are the ones that people have asked about and have pursued so as to get a shelf check.
Well, first, it's a book I've been looking for in Widener for the last nine months, and it's continually out.
I have to assume that... Charged out?
I haven't checked to see if it's charged out.
It's been out for nine months.
Could somebody have a book for nine months?
Yes.
Okay, and it hasn't been that critical.
It's just a book on Garrick, you know.
You should go to the... ...and see if it's charged out, and they'll get it back, you see.
But that actually would almost force them to look at it.
That would force them to look and see if it is charged out.
Yes, and they would go through a routine if there's no charge.
They'd go through a routine, and then they'd declare it lost, and then that book would go to a book selector who would decide whether they ought to try to buy a reprint or a new edition of that book to replace it, you see.
But it's only books like that that you find out about.
The other books you would only find out about if you made an inventory, which means taking the shelf list cards or printouts and going over the shelves.
And that's when you find misplaced books, mis-shelved books.
That's probably the only way you're going to find a mis-shelved book.
And your book could be mis-shelved.
It could be a thousand numbers away.
It's a very difficult thing, isn't it?
Yes.
This guy has things that nobody knows, and it's almost impossible to know.
that they're missing.
Yes.
I guess is what I'm driving at.
I'm not trying to suggest that you should have known they were gone, it's just that it's almost impossible to know that they're going to be dealing with 11 million books at our university.
And there are dozens of other libraries that are in the same situation.
The other category of books from Weidner, in addition to the Angling books, is books of American local history, particularly Southern, Southwestern,
far western towns and states.
He, for instance, had an envelope full of early 1880s Wyoming imprints in the Wyoming section in the U.S.
history classification library.
From Baker, he took similar material.
The promotional books and pamphlets that towns and cities made
trying to demonstrate that they were a good place to come to go into business, you see.
And this literature goes back to the middle of the 19th century.
So he had some very nice earlier books from Baker of that sort.
The Widener ones tended to be turn of the century.
And then there were a few things from the Quest collection.
Some of them were just works in economic theory and economic history that he'd taken.
Do you have a handle on this guy?
There were some other books from Widener that had to do with
Now, if you looked at the collection as a whole, Angling was an odd, odd interest.
You didn't find Angling books when taken from other places.
Yes.
He must have discovered the Angling collection and then decided that that would be something that would be fun to work with.
But you can't say that he picked this up and took dangling books from the other libraries.
But he did take from a variety of libraries books which had to do with ornamental hardware, which in the news accounts you will find is said to be a specialty.
He knew a lot about hardware to begin with.
He also stole antiques and things, right?
But you did find ornamental hardware, the catalogs of manufacturers, and then a lot of 19th century books on house plans and building, and some 20th century books, too.
Not early books.
For the most part, his books were in English.
He didn't really go into foreign languages.
so that he could read all the books that he was getting.
So that formed a special collection of the ornamental hardware to the building, building design and building ornaments.
And then the local history, there were books from many libraries having to do with interesting southern and southwestern and western towns and states.
The special interest was Indians, and there were wonderful books on Indians that I had never heard of or seen before.
Textbooks for the Indian schools, accounts of Indians.
He really did very well in the collecting of Indians.
I confess that I did not see all the books, but he must have cleaned Wayne State out of
early books, FTC books, 16th century books.
And he did very well in, was it Pomona and University of Southern California in Southwest Americana.
I think that the books that impressed me most were the books from Southwest, early Southwestern immigrants that he got there.
So that the impression that you got from this was not of a
some kind of a maniac who was taking any book that he could find.
That was not the case at all.
It was focus.
This is the result of a collector with definable interests who is working on a set of collections any way he can, and instead of buying books from booksellers,
he is taking books wherever he can get in.
So there's a very clever mentality at work here, not an insane one at all.
There is at work there a person who I am told... Hello?
Yep.
I am told the work of someone who stole band instruments and antiques and anything that he could to sell at flea markets and swap fairs and the like to obtain income so that the activities of Mr. Lundberg were not at all confined to books
I think he kept the books, though.
And this was probably about the sentence to nourish the book away.
As you say, he kept the books, but you don't know what, you can't tell what his intentions were.
Someone who removes Marx from such a vast point of view of books is taking the first step toward sales.
If I steal a book and keep it at home,
I can leave the Yale marks in it, you know, in my private reserve.
But if it occurs to me that I might like to sell that book from Yale, I would start working away, and I'd remove all the marks from it.
And hundreds and hundreds, if not thousands, of books were worked on, some of them very crudely, very crudely indeed.
You find a notary squeeze stamp over the library squeeze stamp obliterating it so you couldn't possibly make it out.
And then there are places where a piece is cut out of the leaf, you see.
So he has damaged a number of books.
A lot of these books are mutilated.
But the work extends, ranges from this brutalizing
of books, to obliterate marks and remove marks, to very sophisticated work, so that only when you perhaps rub your finger against the pastel end paper do you see a fine mark of paste.
You pick it up at your fingertip when you can't really see it straight away.
Or you hold a leaf up to the light and you see the dampness on a corner.
Many tidal leaves were cut out so that they could be worked on with an iron and soap and are loosely inserted.
So there's quite a range of work on removing marks.
And the most perverse of the tamperings amounted to replacing marks.
Now, at the end of my last stint, I was there two and a half days that time, I was commencing to identify Harvard books simply from the distinctive font used to stamp the gold lettering on Steins and the distinctive handwriting
used to mark letters on pamphlet bindings, the kind of repair work, cloth repair work done in Widener, the texture and color of the binding cloth, and the board used in pamphlet bindings in Baker and in Widener, because the books I was identifying had labels on them
with shelf marks that were not in the Harvard system.
I don't, to confess, know which library they're from.
Books which would have inside perhaps an ink stamp of the University of Minnesota Education Library, Minneapolis Public Library, a book plate, or something like that, and no Harvard marks on the title leaf, except perhaps
a forgotten mark that might seem irrelevant to some people, but which would mean something to those of us who work a lot in this stack of library.
And this was the most aggravating part of my work among these books, not to say, oh, that's a fearing copy.
You know, from 20 feet away, you can look at that green morocco and that distinctive marble paper and say, ah, that's a fearing copy.
But working with these books that had bogus marks added
And I cannot explain that except to say that it might help you to take a book out of a library.
If you were working at the Sterling Library and you had taken in some book plates from Widener, and if you removed Sterling plates and put Widener's plates in their place, you'd show them to the guard and say, this is a video copy.
I'm a Harvard student and I've brought this with me.
That sort of thing.
Thank you, Paul.
There's one route to get the books out of the library.
It could be.
I can't explain it.
I don't know.
There may be some testimony about how this works.
Are you going to go to the trial?
I will be a witness.
I'll be responsible for a long list of argued books that we have identified.
We've gone through quite a drill.
We were given a lot of shelf marks
from notes and book plates that had been removed and found in a trunk full of that sort of thing.
And we took those and checked them against the shelf list and got back to the books and then checked to see if the book was on the shelf and produced a bibliographic entry to go back to the FBI.
And in that way, we found some books that we wouldn't have found otherwise.
And we had checked the shelf, checked the card catalog,
For some of these books, Harvard's got three or four copies in various places.
And in some cases, we would go to the shelf and we'd find three copies and not the fourth copy.
And then we would note the shelf mark of the fourth copy and see if that fitted the copy in question.
So there are altogether hundreds and hundreds of hours of work that went in on this case, not only here in Hoden, working on the Widener part, but on the part of our colleagues in Widener, and then our colleagues in the Business School in the Baker Library.
But that's only the first step.
When these books come back, we're going to have to remove these bogus markings and re-tag them in order to put them back on the shelf.
So there's an immense cost involved there inside the library.
And the worst thing of all, and I've made a talk about this at the Columbia Library School in July, the worst of this is that all these libraries are a network of sharing institutions.
Now, the first
organized sharing was this National Union catalog, a Carnegie-funded catalog in the Library of Congress, which was the first card catalog, and then got printed as that big set of books.
And this is the way that your interlibrary loan would discover a copy of a book that your library didn't have for you as a student or scholar.
You'd send a letter to Washington, and they would tell you that Yale has that book.
And then you try to get it from Yale.
It's also a road map for a guy like Blumgård.
Oh, yes.
Oh, yes, it can be.
But that was the first step.
And now we're all in these, you know, networks, computer networks.
So what you did by consulting the cards, the Library of Congress, and then the book catalogs, and you see UW doing a computer.
And these locations come up.
So you go for the library that's closest to you,
a library that perhaps you exchange a lot with, and you borrow the book, or you got a microfilm of that book for the scholar who needs it.
This is how things work in this country.
Well, if somebody comes along and steals 25,000 of these books, they're not there.
And whenever the book comes out, someone has got to start going through that drill.
You know, the interlibrary loan request goes out to the University of Southern California.
Somebody goes to the shelf.
Well, the book isn't there.
Is it in the shelf?
You immediately start this expensive process of discovering where the book is.
In the end, it may take you a couple of weeks, and you discover you can't find the book.
It's lost.
So you report back to Yale, no, I'm sorry, we can't find our copy.
So here you are back at square one at the interlibrary loan office in Yale, and the scholar are waiting for the book.
It's three weeks or four weeks gone now.
Now they're going to go to the second library and try it there.
Well, there's 25,000 books plucked out of this network of sharing institutions, which is just putting roadblocks in everybody's way when they're collecting their books to do their teaching or their learning or their scholarship or research.
On the other side of it, there are whole collections that are so decimated that they cannot be very useful locally, because in some cases there's so many books taken from one institution.
What's your feeling in this room, in this warehouse?
What's the sense of
I mean, as a person who's committed his professional life, and I'm sure it's more than a way of making a living for you, I mean, it's a passion to walk into a warehouse that contains 25,000 stolen items.
What do you feel?
I mean, there has to be some kind of emotional, intellectual reaction for you.
In the end, it's the impact of this.
You know, if somebody steals a book from you, you are impaired.
Just you.
Are you okay?
I just don't want to miss it.
It's just you.
You know, you have a book that you are very fond of and somebody steals it from you.
You're the only one who's impaired.
You're going to widen your stack and steal a book.
And it's a whole community of scholars, depending on which book you take.
You take a book of which there are 50 editions and 100 copies.
That's no different.
You're not going to impair much.
Well, if I go in to find Sylvester de Sassi's book, and I know you've only got one copy, and I don't know where the hell I'm going to find a copy of this stuff myself.
Now, I'm really in a fix, aren't I?
Yes.
And these books tend to be Sylvester de Sassi kind of books that we're talking about here.
There are some reference books.
There is a bibliographical reference.
How long did you put that?
Here and there.
A pretty good bibliographical reference.
Well, it seems as big as this.
Which is more than that, I think.
And those are books that you can find.
There's nothing special about those.
You've got a lot of booksellers' catalogs, particularly Antoine.
I don't know where they came from.
But you kept beyond the reference collection.
And these are books that really
are going to be hard to replace, and perhaps hard to find the second or third of a tangible copy when this first copy is found missing.
Have you ever seen anything of a scale before?
I've never heard of anything like this.
No, we've had a set of interesting thieves here.
The so-called French Thief, who I think had about a thousand titles out of Widener.
And we just discovered him and his cache in the summer.
The summer just passed?
Right.
And then we had a bright, he was very bright, the French Thief.
French titles, in other words.
French books.
And he was dubbed the French Thief because he was preceded by an English thief who had thousands of books.
out of British constitutional history, and was discovered by his janitor packing these books up and about to take them to his first teaching job out in California.
This was an academic?
Yes, he was graduating in history, in a graduate school in history, and had his first teaching job out in the West, and it had all these widely books and cartons, and he was going to ship them out.
But he had really blocked study or teaching in his subject.
He had stolen so many books on the same theme, you see, the English one.
And then in between the English one and the French one, we had a thief who was another long-term, long-time member of the graduate to our school here.
He stole about 250 books, but they were all war books.
They were the kind that we tried to identify and transfer to the River Books Library, and he had started to offer them for sale in Boston and New York, and the booksellers found it.
The booksellers are very good about this.
They know very well if you bring in some books and they don't suit your conversation.
Were any criminal proceedings running against these people?
Now, I don't know what's going to happen to the French thief.
I think they're trying to pursue him, but he is way out of state when we, according to most recent advice, it's Colorado or something like that.
But have the books with him?
No, the books were here, in Cambridge, in the Port of the Square.
So I don't know.
I think that they will try to see if they can find him.
He's long gone from Cambridge, and last heard from.
Now, the one in the middle, who stole the rare books, was prosecuted.
This is something I can check in the... I can find...
down as a follow-up for me, I can get his name, and I can get a letter from the director of the University Library that says what happened, and I can't remember the technical term, the court term.
And all I can tell is if you give me his name, I'll get it, too, from the court.
I'm very glad.
Well, anyhow, the way I'll find it is to get this letter out from the director of the library that says he's to be denied access to the library.
It tells what happened, and you can take the name, and he refers to the court, too.
Well, I'll just get that from public records.
And the first one is Jeffrey Nelson, who stole all the English books, and that didn't get to court.
He was denied his doctorate by the faculty, and I don't know what's happened to him.
He made the newspapers.
Oh, he did make the newspapers.
And if you will remind me of him,
And this rare book thief, I can get, I'll give you a year for Nelson.
Jeffrey with a J, I would imagine.
All I've got is, I have a folder.
I'm pretty sure it's at home.
This is very important, you know, this has to be treated tastefully.
Let me just touch it here.
I left that this morning.
But I have in one of those blue folders, Nelson and the year and month.
It's about commencement time that he's discovered.
It's at the end of the academic year.
He's packing up, you see, to leave Harvard.
And give you the year for Nelson, it'll be something like June.
And I'll get the name.
And you say he made the papers?
Yes, because he'd stolen from several places.
Well, so had the French that he'd stolen from Currie down in Milton, Currie College.
And as I say of him, he was much more threatening there than here, because if you take a thousand books away from Widener, he was not only taking a thousand books away from Currie College, and he had pretty near the whole play act.
You know what the French
standard tradition.
The library of America has modeled after that.
Yeah, pretty near the whole Playad out of Curry College.
And if you can imagine yourself trying to teach a little French literature down there, there's your Playad.
In Widener, you've got backups.
You know, the Playad is not the only edition of Moliere that you've got to work with.
That was a case where you really can affect the local teaching program like that at Curry College.
Keep at me for those two, and I will give you a date and a name.
And you're going to the trial, right?
I am among half a dozen librarians who are scheduled to testify for the prosecution about our losses.
I assume that they'll have a list, and they'll say,
Does this represent the books stolen from, or something like that?
Did they indicate how long the trial might take?
No.
I think I'll be intended.
I think it will be worthwhile.
Oh, yeah.
No question.
If it is permitted to go the distance, if they're permitted to make their case,
If the prosecution is permitted to make its case, that would be absolutely fascinating.
And it's possible that we will learn some of the details about how these thefts were effective.
I would hope.
I mean, they've got him dead to rights.
I would hope they would not accept a plea, because I think they owe it to the scholarly community to find out as much about this as we possibly can.
I think you're right.
I'm very much impressed by the federal
officers and the FBI.
And of course I've seen more of the FBI than I have of the prosecutors.
But I could imagine people in that line of business losing their patience over this.
You know, it's not like that drug bust of stolen automobiles or something like that.
This is pretty finicky small stuff.
But they discovered what they had.
They went to the library community and said, what do we do?
And they got good advice, and they took it.
And they received absolute support.
You know, if they told me, we need you out there tomorrow to look at these books, I would go.
Because it has to be done.
Just full of respect.
Maybe it's a blessing that it's in the Midwest.
If this were in one of these really harried...
East Coast, Boston, New York.
I can't speak to that.
I can speak to their dedication and their patience over this.
The officers involved are really trying to do the right thing.
They commanded our respect from the outset and right through everything.
I've never been let down by them.
I think I'll make a call out there again next week.
They wouldn't let me into the warehouse.
And I can respect that.
Well, they shouldn't.
I respect it entirely.
That's why we're talking about some time after the trial has run its course.
Absolutely without question.
And let me put the machine on it.
There's no way I would use any of this stuff prior to the resolution of the case.
And I run it by you, too.
I've made this commitment a number of times.
But I want the thing right.
correct, and I don't want any high feelings on anybody's part, but I also want, I think this really deserves to be told, this is really an extraordinary case.
It really is.
You know, I haven't seen anything here at Holden yet, and I don't think I have to do it today.
I mean, I've never really been in to see any of the Holden that you have here.
Is that something you'd like to do, something really good for today?
I don't want to
I've taken two hours of your time already.
I don't quite because I knocked a half hour right out of here.
Fortunately for me, you're not far away, and if you have other things that you want to do, I can always... Well, we might as well pursue today what's on your mind today.
Okay.
There's always another time to look.
What is it that you would like to see about this place?
I would like to see... I would like to have a feel for some of the treasures that you have.
And at some point...
Okay.
I would like to have the experience of requesting something and go through the process of bidding.
Well, you could do that anytime.
If you bring in two IDs, register as a reader up at that desk in the lobby, and you get a reader's card, and you put that in the reading room, you leave that there, and it's good until July 1st when you're supposed to register again.
I'll do that today.
You'd like a picture ID, a driver's license, a passport, something else.
And then you're on your own.
You've got a lot of readers' cards now with six different institutions.
There's a lot of shelf marks in the bridge catalog there that's immediately accessible to you.
Well, Mark, why don't I do that?
As opposed to bothering you with a tour.
Well, that's not a tour.
It's a tour of discovery for myself, I think.
What's the main theme of the book?
Is it the market or is it the collector?
It's collecting.
Say again.
We're going to do an exhibition on collectors for our 50th birthday in 1992.
In this building are a couple of spots dedicated to collectors.
If you wanted to skip along now, can we do that?
There's a talk at 4.30 in one of the rooms, but I would make a point of showing you two rooms that have to do with collectors.
That's very good.
And one collector is not new and one isn't.